update foundry starter kit (#168)
rsksmart/devportal: tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet.md

we can also use many of Ethereum's developer tools.

In this tutorial I will show you step by step how to use Remix and Metamask, which are tools that were originally built for Ethereum, to create and deploy a simple smart contract on RSK's Testnet.

### Requirements

- Metamask
- Remix

### Metamask

Metamask is a kind of web wallet which facilitates transactions using yours accounts.
It can be used with RSK networks too.
It has versions for several browsers, like Chrome, Firefox, Opera and Brave.

Go to [metamask.io](https://metamask.io/) and install it.

Create an account.

Write down your seed phrase, or mnemonic, or backup phrase (all these terms mean the same), with 12 words. This is used to recover your account, in case you lose your password.

The seed phrase is the most important thing in a wallet / account!

### Remix

Remix is an online web tool. It is an IDE (Integrated Development Environment) used to write, compile, deploy and debug Solidity code. Can be connected with Metamask and used to deploy smart contracts to both the RSK Testnet and Mainnet.

Can be accessed at [remix.ethereum.org](https://remix.ethereum.org/)

> ### Connect MetaMask to RSK testnet

Reviewer: @jonathansmirnoff   Do you mean connect Nifty with Remix?

> ### Connect MetaMask to RSK testnet

Reviewer 2: No, I tried to say that she can suggest also to use Nifty because it is integrated with our networks.

> ### Connect MetaMask to RSK testnet

Reviewer 3: Yes, i is a good idea, but with other approach :)
For now my goal is to do tutorials using tools that are most used in Ethereum, to show how it is easy for Ethereum devs :)

---
layout: rsk
title: Using Remix and Metamask with RSK testnet
---

## Using Remix and Metamask with RSK testnet

RSK implementation was based in the Java implementation of Ethereum EVM, so a lot of things that we have in Ethereum it is possible to use at RSK network.

> In this tutorial I will show you step by step how to use Remix and Metamask, which was builded to Ethereum blockchain, to create and deploy a simple smart contract at RSK testnet network.

Reviewer 3: I doubt: why to put it in 3 lines, if it will appear in one line at final present. Do you have any pattern about it?

> In this tutorial I will show you step by step how to use Remix and Metamask, which was builded to Ethereum blockchain, to create and deploy a simple smart contract at RSK testnet network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this tutorial I will show you step by step how to use Remix and Metamask, which are tools that were originally built for Ethereum, to create and deploy a simple smart contract on RSK's Testnet.
```

I did that just tout of habit. converting back to one line.

### Requirements
- Metamask
- Remix

### Metamask
Metamask is a bridge with Ethereum networks, it is a kind of web wallet with facilite the transactions using yours accounts. It can be used with RSK networks too.
It have versions for some browsers, like Chrome, Firefox, Opera and Brave.

Go to [metamask.io](https://metamask.io/) and install it.

Create an account.

> Write down your seed prhase, or mnemonic, or backup phrase (all means the same), with 12 words. This is used to recover your account. Even if you lose your password, you can access your account again. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Write down your seed phrase, or mnemonic, or backup phrase (all these terms mean the same), with 12 words. This is used to recover your account, in case you lose your password.
```

> The seed prhase is the most important thing in a wallet / account!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The seed phrase is the most important thing in a wallet / account!
```

> ### Remix

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Remix

```

> Remix is web tool, online. It is a Solidity IDE (Integrated Development Environment) used to write, compile, deploy and debug Solidity code. Can be connected with Metamask and used to deploy smart contracts at RSK testnet and mainnet.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Remix is an online web tool. It is an IDE (Integrated Development Environment) used to write, compile, deploy and debug Solidity code. Can be connected with Metamask and used to deploy smart contracts to both the RSK Testnet and Mainnet.
```

Can be accessed at [remix.ethereum.org](https://remix.ethereum.org/)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

### Connect MetaMask to RSK testnet

- Go to networks 
- Custom RPC

![networks - custom RPC](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-01.png)

- Network Name

RSK Testnet

- New RPC URL

[https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co](https://public-node.testnet.rsk.co)

- ChainID (optional)

31

- Symbol (optional)

> RBTC

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
R-BTC
```

- Block Explorer URL (optional)

https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/

![RSK Testnet configuration](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-02.png)

> After configurate it, select the RSK Tesnet network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After configuring it, select the RSK Tesnet.
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

### TestNet Faucet

> You can get some RSK coins for Testnet at [faucet.testnet.rsk.co](https://faucet.testnet.rsk.co/)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can get some Testnet R-BTC at [faucet.testnet.rsk.co](https://faucet.testnet.rsk.co/).
```

Copy your address from Metamask

![Copy address from Metamask](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-03.png)

> Fill your wallet address and pass the CAPTCHA.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Enter your wallet address and pass the CAPTCHA.
```

Wait a few seconds...

![Wait a few seconds](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-04.png)

![Received some R-BTCs](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-05.png)

You can see the transaction hash, this is my example:

> [https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0xf63c45dabd52e0b44f4cf15825985e9ddfe790b4323a88a3531f762a417f9011](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0xf63c45dabd52e0b44f4cf15825985e9ddfe790b4323a88a3531f762a417f9011)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can see the transaction hash, for example [`0xf63c45dabd52e0b44f4cf15825985e9ddfe790b4323a88a3531f762a417f9011`](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0xf63c45dabd52e0b44f4cf15825985e9ddfe790b4323a88a3531f762a417f9011).
```

Reviewer 3: This is the hash of the transaction I did in the example, how can I say i in a better way?

Reviewer 4: The suggestion was to:

- replace "this is my example" with "for example"
- replace the text of of the explorer URL with just the hash (the hyperlink remains the same)

Reviewer 3: Ok, I need to read some lines above to be sure it is good on this way :) Thanks

> Now I have 0.05 RBTC!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now I have 0.05 R-BTC!
```

![R-BTCs at Metamask wallet](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-06.png)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

# Remix

Go to 

[remix.ethereum.org](http://remix.ethereum.org/)

In the home / welcome page, choose environment `Solidity`.

![Remix environment Solidity](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-08.png)

# Remix Connect RSK Testnet

With the RSK network selected at Metamask...

At Remix, on the left side, locate the button `Deploy and run transactions`. 
For now it is the 4th button

![Deploy and run transactions](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-09.png)

At Environment, choose `Injected Web3`

![Injected Web3](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-10.png)

Injected Web3 connects Remix with active account in Metamask

![Injected Web3 - ChainID 31](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-11.png)

ChainID 31 was defined at RSK Testnet custom network in Metamask.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

# Create a smart contract

> Click at second button on the left side - file explorer 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Click on the second button on the left side - file explorer 
```

![file explorer](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-12.png)

> Click at + create a new file

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Click on + create a new file
```

![create a new file](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-13.png)

> File name: SimpleStorage.sol

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
File name: `SimpleStorage.sol`
```

![SimpleStorage.sol](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-14.png)

Copy this example:

```shell
pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.7.0;

contract SimpleStorage {
    uint storedData;

    function set(uint x) public {
        storedData = x;
    }

    function get() public view returns (uint) {
        return storedData;
    }
}
```

And paste it here:
![SimpleStorage.sol](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-15.png)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

### SimpleStorage.sol

> This smart contract have:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This smart contract has:
```

* A variable storedData to store a number
* A function get() to return the number stored at variable storedData

> * A function set() to change the number stored at variable storedData

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* A variable `storedData` to store a number
* A function `get()` to return the number stored at variable `storedData`
* A function `set()` to change the number stored at variable `storedData`
```

### Compile a smart contract 

In the 3rd button at left side click on Solidity compiler

![Compile smart contract](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-16.png)

It is useful to enable auto-compile

![enable auto-compile](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-17.png)

![enable auto-compile](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-18.png)

For now click in the button Compile SimpleStorage.sol

![Compile SimpleStorage.sol](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-19.png)

> Check the green sign at 3th button with the message compilation successful

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Check the green sign at 3rd button with the message compilation successful
```

![compilation successful](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-20.png)

### Deploy a smart contract at RSK testnet

In the left side panel, go to the button `Deploy and run transactions`. Actually, it is the 4th button.

![Deploy and run transactions](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-21.png)

> For now we have only one smart contract, so it is automatically select at dropbox

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For now we have only one smart contract, so it is automatically selected in the dropdown.
```

![SimpleStorage.sol](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-22.png)

Click in the button `Deploy`.

It will open a Metamask popup window, to confirm the transaction to create the smart contract SimpleStorage.sol

![Deploy](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-23.png)

Click on confirm.

At bottom right, we can check the message: `creation of SimpleStorage pending...`

![creation of SimpleStorage pending](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-24.png)

![transaction confirmed](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-25.png)

Once it is confirmed, we can check it

![check the transaction](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-26.png)

> Click at transaction line or debug button (at right side) to see more details of transaction:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Click on the transaction line or the debug button (at the right side) to see more details of the transaction:
```

![transaction details](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-27.png)

Copy the transaction hash to verify at blockchain explorer

![transaction hash](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-28.png)

![transaction hash copied](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-29.png)

Is this example, the transaction hash is: 

0x419c4b17ec0bf59568d9b5f5c7f0e4678039f52b9c644c2914ccd0bd2bb331da

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

### RSK Explorer

> The RSK explorer is the blockchain explorer to RSK transactions. We will use the testnet explorer:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The RSK explorer is the blockchain explorer for RSK transactions. We will use the Testnet explorer:
```

[explorer.testnet.rsk.co](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/)

![explorer](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-30.png)

> Past the transaction hash at search field, in the top of screen

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Past the transaction hash at search field, at the top of the screen
```

![search](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-31.png)

![search transaction](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-32.png)

This is the result:

![transaction result](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-33.png)

You can verify my example at link:

> [https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0x419c4b17ec0bf59568d9b5f5c7f0e4678039f52b9c644c2914ccd0bd2bb331da](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0x419c4b17ec0bf59568d9b5f5c7f0e4678039f52b9c644c2914ccd0bd2bb331da)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can verify my example at: [`0x419c4b17ec0bf59568d9b5f5c7f0e4678039f52b9c644c2914ccd0bd2bb331da`](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0x419c4b17ec0bf59568d9b5f5c7f0e4678039f52b9c644c2914ccd0bd2bb331da)
```

### Interact with the smart contract 

> When a smart contract is deployed with Remix, we can see it in the left panel in deploy and run transactions:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a smart contract is deployed with Remix, we can see it in the left panel under deploy and run transactions:
```

![deployed contracts](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-34.png)

Click on > to expand SimpleStorage:

![SimpleStorage](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-35.png)

These are the same functions we created in our smart contract!

> The orange buttons are functions which will change some information at blockchain, we call it change states. This kind of function spent gas to use it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The orange buttons are functions which will change some information stored on the blockchain, we call it state changes. This kind of function expends gas when used.
```

> The blue buttons are functions which only read functions and it does not change anything on blockchain network. We do not need gas to use it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The blue buttons are functions which are read-only and it do not change anything on stored on the blockchain. We do not need to expend gas when using them.
```

Reviewer 3: "anything on stored on the blockchain" is strange...
is it "anything stored on the blockchain" ?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that's right!

```suggestion
The blue buttons are functions which are read-only and it does not change anything stored on the blockchain. We do not need to expend gas when using them.
```

### Get

First of all, we will check the value stored at deploy.

Click in the button get

![get](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-36.png)

We do not have any value stored, because we do not define anything at the moment when we deployed.

At bottom right, we can check that it was a call to `SimpleStorage.get()` function:

![transaction get](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-37.png)

## Set

Put a value in the field at the right side of the set button, and click on the button

![value to set](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-38.png)

It will open a Metamask popup window, to confirm the transaction to store a value.

![confirm transaction](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-39.png)

> Click in confirm

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Click on confirm
```

At bottom right, we can verify that the transaction is pending, waiting confirmation at blockchain:

![transaction status](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-40.png)

> After a few seconds, Metamask will show when the transaction is mined!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After a few seconds, Metamask will show when the transaction has been confirmed!
```

![transaction mined](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-41.png)

At bottom right, we have the transaction’s details

![transaction details](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-42.png)

You can copy the transaction hash and verify at RSK explorer too:

> [https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0xb9f4d73e7555d2b3cdf516f2d3044daa58669f7324cb957f2b83da21a6c89b4b](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0xb9f4d73e7555d2b3cdf516f2d3044daa58669f7324cb957f2b83da21a6c89b4b)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can copy the transaction hash and verify at RSK explorer too: [`0xb9f4d73e7555d2b3cdf516f2d3044daa58669f7324cb957f2b83da21a6c89b4b`](https://explorer.testnet.rsk.co/tx/0xb9f4d73e7555d2b3cdf516f2d3044daa58669f7324cb957f2b83da21a6c89b4b)
```

![explorer](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-43.png)

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

```

### Get (again)

Now we have the value 2020 saved, and we can check it

Click in the button get

![get](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-44.png)

And the value is correct!

### Transactions in Metamask

It is possible to verify all transactions in metamask

![Metamask transactions](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-45.png)

![Metamask transactions](/assets/img/tutorials/remix-and-metamask-with-rsk-testnet/image-46.png)

# Final considerations

> Have you thought before that it is so easy to use Remix and Metamask creating a smart contract which can be used at Ethereum ou RSK network?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Did you think that it would be so easy to use Remix and Metamask to create a smart contract which can be used on both Ethereum or RSK networks?
```

> I showed to you how we can use some tools which was builded to Ethereum blockchain, and it is great to realize that they can be used at RSK network. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
I showed to you how we can use some Ethereum developer tools, and it is great to realize that they can be used on the RSK network as well. 
```

> Our goal is to join forces and give options to people who believe in smart contracts based both Ethereum, but also believe in the Bitcoin power, through RSK network.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our goal is to join forces and give options to people who believe in smart contracts based on Ethereum, and also believe in the power of Bitcoin, through RSK.
```

> I hope this tutorial "Using Remix and Metamask with RSK testnet" has been helpful and I'd appreciate any of your feedback. Share it if you like it :)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
I hope this tutorial has been helpful and I'd appreciate your feedback. Share it if you like it :)
```
